# Words as Contracts

Words are powerful.  I touched upon how they [shape our internal thoughts](http://trippple.click/2015/04/the-double-plus-goodness-of-words/) They also bind our external actions.  Bear with me a bit.  I’ll emphasize the interesting part.  I confess this one is a bit abstract.  It might not be for everyone.  Also some of the connections I try to make may be a bit loose.  Try to humor me.

When I write that words bind us, I expect most connect the phrase with contracts.  All laws from grandiose US Federal law to menial office policies are social contracts.  Religious texts aren’t exactly social contracts, but they direct us all the same.  What surprises me are people that esteem the exact wording of these documents more than their meaning.

I program computers for a living.  I write in a special language created especially for dictating to a computer how to operate.  You are most likely familiar with natural languages like English or Spanish.  You might not consider sheet music and mathematical symbols a language, but they are.  The languages of computers, music and math are specialized.  They can do far less than a natural language, but they are much better fits for the task they are designed for.  For example, a programming language is perfectly precise.  There is only one legal interpretation for anything written in most programming languages.  We say languages like that are deterministic.

Human languages have many virtues, but precision is not among them.  In spite of this short coming, human languages are the language of contracts, law, and religion. English is so poor that professions often commander existing words in order to give them a more precise and permanent meaning under the contexts they control.  [Clinical depression does not necessarily include sadness.](http://trippple.click/2015/04/the-double-plus-goodness-of-words/)  Legal insanity is the inability to decipher right and wrong.  Psychologists have disowned the term "insanity" entirely.  They are are eager to point out that it isn’t even in the DSM.  Well, this edition of the DSM, amiright?  Such special definitions are a valiant effort, but are impossibly ill suited to address the precision problem with natural languages.

What do we do?  How do we read an ancient religious text when the meaning of words and idioms change over mere decades?  Do we enforce a law that describes outlawed drugs in a way that includes dangerous substances but also grandpa’s heart medication?

**At times I consider how foolish we look, bound to words like the victims of the monkey’s paw.  It is typically a struggle between the intended and literal meaning.  The literal meaning often reigns supreme, even when the consequences are absurd.  Permit me to present a few entertaining examples.**

Canary clauses are my favorite examples of word games in contracts.  Check out this line in Apple’s Transparency Report “Apple has never received an order under Section 215 of the USA Patriot Act. We would expect to challenge such an order if served on us.”  That section allows the government to forbid parties from talking about things like search warrants.  Big tech companies (Google, Apple, Microsoft, Twitter, Facebook, Yahoo) routinely publish similar statements, so long as they are true.  When they no longer publish such statements, one can deduce they have been subjected to a warrant the company may not talk about.  The wit of it all is how it dodges between what might otherwise be a tightly written policy.  Everything is communicated without lies or explicit disclosure.  Consider that the most powerful state in the world quickly relents to the contract.  I can fathom why, but it doesn’t make it less interesting.  They are like us, all bound by words like spirits in a fable.  Etymological trivia:  The term “canary clause” comes from canaries that were used to detect deadly odorless gases in coal mines.  The canaries death signaled danger.

The knife cuts both ways.  Recall the Occupy Wall Street protests.  Although US citizens have the right to protest, those rights and many can be usurped by the state in the interest of public health.  Typhoid Mary will testify in these regards.  New York City dispersed Occupy Wall Street under the pretense it posed a public health hazard.  Words kept the protesters safe for a time.  We allow the city to move on the protesters, even when they rely on a convenient interpretation.

Radiolab has a great piece on the genius of the now cliche phrase ["neither confirm nor deny"](http://www.radiolab.org/story/confirm-nor-deny/).  Better still, the show won a Peabody for a piece it did on the [60 most powerful words](http://www.radiolab.org/story/60-words/) issued in recent history.  [This short essay](http://www.straightdope.com/columns/read/3217/why-don-t-states-declare-war-anymore) by Cecil Adams at The Straight Dope is an excellent chaser.  It argues that common folk’s concept of how war is declared is significantly outdated.  All these pieces hinge on important words.

Words control us inside and out.  We are bound by their meaning.  I can understand why we surrender to written contracts.  I am amused by how far we go to honor literal interpretations over the intended meaning.
