# Good Stories Provide Emotional Education

Where an essay or sermon intends to engage our reason, good stories engage our emotions.  We can experience events vicariously through a witness or protagonist.  We can enter their frame of mind.  We can wear their values and emotions like we wear costumes.  A story might serve to inform us when we face similar decisions as we move to towards or away from the emotional experience it imprinted on us.  A story might move us to empathize with an otherwise alien perspective.

Acknowledging that stories are especially well suited to give us emotional insight raises the stakes in conversations about what constitutes a good story.  Is a story enhanced by a believable villain?  A relatable one?  Do detailed accounts of vile acts enhance a story’s ability to teach us?  Are heroic archetypes better suited to teach than flawed, relatable heroes?  Should we require stories to show us life as it ought to be or is there value in stories that describe life where it is?  The best answers might be nuanced and depend factors well beyond what is reasonable for this short post.  Most importantly, can a bad story–fact or fiction–do harm?  What factors might cause a story to impede our empathy or distort our perception of how we will feel in a potential circumstance?

The world is dangerous.  Jesus called us to be wise as serpents and harmless as doves.  Stories are means to understand ourselves and others — especially those that would mean us harm.  Yet we are changed by the things we set out minds upon.  Nietzche wrote “He who fights with monsters should be careful lest he thereby become a monster. And if thou gaze long into an abyss, the abyss will also gaze into thee.”
