My son is passionate about politics and history.  He is interested in philosophy as it relates to justice and leadership, but not much else philosophical.  I was pleased he picked up 1984 ([W](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1984), [buy](http://www.amazon.com/1984-Signet-Classics-George-Orwell/dp/0451524934/)).  He came for the authoritarian dystopia and also got a bit about how words shape our thoughts.  The later is a particularly valuable and underrated concept.

Words are important.  Spellling, not so much.  Our thoughts manifest as inner verbal monologue.  The prelingually deaf are those that prior to learning to understand and speak a language.  They struggle with learning disability related to their brains in-exposure to spoken words.  (Bear in mind it is a learning disability, not an intellectual or mental one.)  It is difficult to conceive and process an idea for which we have no word.  Contrariwise, precise words are like short hand for nuanced concepts that equip us to think quickly in precise ways.  The best technical jargon rises small groups that delve deep into particular topics, be they blue collar or white collar.  Xkcd illustrates all this particularly well with a [diagram of the rocket](https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/up_goer_five.png) that only uses the “ten hundred” most commonly used English words.  (The word “thousand” must not have made the cut.

Language change.  Some changes are more democratic and innocuous than others.  In 1984, Big Brother intends Newspeak to replace English.  It is intended to handicap the people and facilitate Big Brother’s agenda.  Shaping language as a means to support a particular agenda is far more common than most people notice.  “Pro-life”, “pro-choice” and “living wage” were all carefully chosen and promoted by their respective lobbies.  Parsing the good change from the bad requires a sort of mindfulness that does not come natural to everyone.

I leave you with a quote from C.S. Lewis.  “Don’t use words too big for the subject. Don’t say infinitely when you mean very; otherwise you’ll have no word left when you want to talk about something really infinite.”  [That is literally the best advice I have ever heard.](https://archive.ph/MkJ3L)
