# Reasonably Secure

Security. Secure software: hackers, malware, encryption. Secure physical systems: locks, vaults, prisons. I’d propose even “secure” social systems: balanced political entities or a military command structure. I write software for consumer electronics. Security is often a consideration.

**Security design only addresses threats the architect feels are reasonable. That is to say the foundation of every security design is subjective.**  Surprised?  I was.  I expected security to be a thick book of black-and-white “best practices”. How can anything this important be subjective?  Allow me to explain…

We start by accepting there are no perfectly secure systems. Industry hopes were high until Ocean’s Eleven was released. What little hope remained was dashed by Ocean’s Twelve and Thirteen. Okay, seriously.  Why the pessimistic axiom?  To start, no one can predict an unknown clever attacker–and there is always someone more clever. Worse yet, as time passes general innovation grants advantage to the attacker’s plans.  Then there are more *calculated* reasons to be concerned.  Consider all modern computing system rely on particular math problem to authenticate and encrypt everything.  There are some problems mathematicians can prove don’t have easy solutions.  They have yet to prove if the math problem that serves as the foundation to all modern computer security is among those without easy solutions.  There is a chance we haven’t found it yet.  Future innovation tends to favor the plans of future attackers.  Oh, and the consequences of finding a quick solution to that math problem–don’t wade too deep into the consequences of that potential future.  It is an unholy mess!

Although an architect must concede his system can’t be perfect, he can slather on layer-upon-layer of security measures. Each layer impedes intruders not just because it may be difficult to overcome but also because each layer tilts the balance of “risk and reward” an adversary considers before launching an attack. Yet each slathered security layer isn’t free–design-wise, I mean. Each layer has some kind of complexity, which costs a measure of convenience. A password is less convenient than no password. And a long, frequently changed password with lots of numbers and special symbols is even less convenient. If the complexity diminishes convenience enough, users will institute practices that undermine the entire system design–like stick the password on a note to a monitor.

So perfect security is right out the window and there is a limit to how much security folks will tolerate. This is why the foundation of security starts with “how paranoid am I?” Every choice that follows is a trade offs that hopefully move the design closer to the goal: a system no reasonable person would attack.
